Dear Editor,

We are submitting the manuscript entitled  “Interaction driven phases in the half-filled honeycomb lattice: an infinite density matrix renormalization group study” to be considered for publication in Physical Review B.

Topological phases of matter have recently attracted considerable attention as they represent a novel phase of matter with fascinating properties, e.g., fractionalized excitations and gapless edge states that are protected by the bulk topology. One intriguing route which has been discussed thoroughly is the possible emergence of lattice analogues of the integer quantum Hall effect, known as Chern insulators, in simple, topologically trivial, systems with strong electron-electron interactions. An important example is electrons hopping on the honeycomb lattice with short range nearest- and next-to-nearest electron repulsion. Since the first proposal in 2008, the accumulated body of knowledge regarding this problem is extremely controversial. First, simple mean field theory predicts the Chern insulator phase to occur, but exact diagonalization results, that do take into account quantum fluctuations, are contradictory and seem to are subject to strong finite size effects. The problem calls for an innovative technique beyond existing approaches that can establish whether this interaction induced mechanism is viable so as to generate Chern insulator phases in the honeycomb lattice and related systems.

In this work we address this problem using the infinite density matrix renormalization group (iDMRG) method. This algorithm has by now been successfully used to simulate numerous two-dimensional topological phases but has not been applied to this problem. Our findings portray the absence of the Chern insulator state but also reveal two previously unnoticed charge ordered phases as well as the existence and stability of all the non-topological competing orders that were found previously within mean field.

We are  confident that this manuscript presents an important step towards establishing the phase diagram of short-range interacting fermions hopping in the half-filled honeycomb lattice, an important problem since the early days of graphene. We therefore believe that it meets the standards for publication in Physical Review B.

At the time of completion of this work, we became aware of a related work by Sylvain Capponi and Andreas Läuchli (Ref. 40) who have used large scale exact diagonalization methods to address this problem. Both works present consistent results obtained with complementary techniques. We therefore suggest that they could be forwarded to the same referees and/or published back to back to enhance their visibility. 

Yours faithfully,

The authors

Johannes Motruk, Adolfo G. Grushin, Fernando de Juan and Frank Pollmann






